README.md, before:

ffmasm
===================

![CI result](../../actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
![CodeQL](../../actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)

ffmasm is an assembler for hand-assembling from Java.  
It uses Foreign Function & Memory API, so the application can call assembled code via [MethodHandle](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/invoke/MethodHandle.html).

* Javadoc: https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/
* Maven package: https://github.com/YaSuenag/ffmasm/packages/
* Supported instructions: See builder classes in [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/amd64/package-summary.html).

# Requirements

Java 22

# Supported platform

* Linux AMD64
* Windows AMD64
* Linux AArch64

# How to build

```
$ mvn package
```

## Test for ffmasm

```bash
$ mvn test
```

# How to use

See [Javadoc](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/) and [cpumodel](examples/cpumodel) examples.

## 1. Create `CodeSegment`

[CodeSegment](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/CodeSegment.html) is a storage for assembled code. In Linux, it would be allocated by `mmap(2)` with executable bit.  
It implements [AutoCloseable](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/AutoCloseable.html), so you can use try-with-resources in below:

```java
try(var seg = new CodeSegment()){
  ...
}
```

## 2. Create `MethodHandle`

You can assemble the code via inner classes of [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.AsmBuilder](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.html):

* [AsmBuilder.AMD64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AMD64.html)
* [AsmBuilder.SSE](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.SSE.html)
* [AsmBuilder.AVX](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AVX.html)
* [AsmBuilder.AArch64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AArch64.html)

### AMD64

You need to use [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64.Register](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/amd64/Register.html) to specify registers in assembly code. Following example shows how you can create method `(I)I` (JNI signature) in ffmasm:

You can get `MethodHandle` in result of `build()`.

```java
var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT // 1st argument
           );

var method = new AsmBuilder.AMD64(seg, desc)
      /* push %rbp      */ .push(Register.RBP)
      /* mov %rsp, %rbp */ .movRM(Register.RSP, Register.RBP, OptionalInt.empty())
      /* mov %rdi, %rax */ .movRM(Register.RDI, Register.RAX, OptionalInt.empty())
      /* leave          */ .leave()
      /* ret            */ .ret()
                           .build(Linker.Option.critical(false));
```

> [!NOTE]
> [Linker.Option.critical()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/Linker.Option.html#critical(boolean)) is recommended to pass `build()` method due to performance, but it might be cause of some issues in JVM (time to synchronize safepoint, memory corruption, etc). See Javadoc of `critical()`.

### AArch64

Most of code is same with AMD64, but it is the only one difference to use `AsmBuilder.AArch64` as builder instance.

```java
var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT // 1st argument
           );

var method = new AsmBuilder.AArch64(codeSegment, desc)
/* stp x29, x30, [sp, #-16]! */ .stp(Register.X29, Register.X30, Register.SP, IndexClass.PreIndex, -16)
/* mov x29,  sp              */ .mov(Register.X29, Register.SP)
/* ldp x29, x30, [sp], #16   */ .ldp(Register.X29, Register.X30, Register.SP, IndexClass.PostIndex, 16)
/* ret                       */ .ret(Optional.empty())
                                .build();
```

## 3. Method call

```java
int ret = (int)method.invoke(100); // "ret" should be 100
```

# Debugging

[ffmasm-disassembler](tools/disas) can disassemble the code in [MemorySegment](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/MemorySegment.html) like generated by ffmasm, and dump assembly code to stdout.

You can download ffmasm-dissassembler Maven package from GitHub packages: https://github.com/YaSuenag/ffmasm/packages/2370043

See [examples/disas](examples/disas) for details.

## Requirements

ffmasm-disassembler requires [hsdis](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/tree/master/src/utils/hsdis).

## Generate hsdis

To generate hsdis for Linux, you can use [hsdis-builder](https://github.com/YaSuenag/hsdis-builder).

## Deploy hsdis

It should be deployed one of following directory (it is documented as source comment in disassembler.cpp in HotSpot):

1. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/<vm>/libhsdis-<arch>.so`
2. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/<vm>/hsdis-<arch>.so`
3. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/hsdis-<arch>.so`
4. `hsdis-<arch>.so`  (using `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`)

If you don't want to deploy hsdis into your JDK, you can specify `hsdis` system property like `-Dhsdis=/path/to/hsdis-amd64.so`

## Examples

```
import com.yasuenag.ffmasmtools.disas.Disassembler;

    : <snip>

MemorySegment rdtsc = createRDTSC(); // Generate machine code with ffmasm
Disassembler.dumpToStdout(rdtsc); // Dump assembly code of `rdtsc` to stdout
```

# Play with JNI

You can bind native method to `MemorySegment` of ffmasm code dynamically.

You have to construct `MemorySegment` of the machine code with `AMD64AsmBuilder`, and you have to get it from `getMemorySegment()`. Then you can bind it via `NativeRegister`.

Following example shows native method `test` is binded to the code made by ffmasm. Note that 1st argument in Java is located at arg3 in native function because this is native function (1st arg is `JNIEnv*`, and 2nd arg is `jobject` or `jclass`).

```java
public native int test(int arg);

<snip>

try(var seg = new CodeSegment()){
  var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // 1st arg (JNIEnv *)
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // 2nd arg (jobject)
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT  // 3rd arg (arg1 of caller)
             );
  var stub = AsmBuilder.AMD64(seg, desc)
/* push %rbp         */ .push(Register.RBP)
/* mov %rsp, %rbp    */ .movRM(Register.RBP, Register.RSP, OptionalInt.empty())
/* mov %arg3, retReg */ .movMR(argReg.arg3(), argReg.returnReg(), OptionalInt.empty()) // arg1 in Java is arg3 in native
/* leave             */ .leave()
/* ret               */ .ret()
                        .getMemorySegment();

  var method = this.getClass()
                   .getMethod("test", int.class);

  var methodMap = Map.of(method, stub);
  var register = NativeRegister.create(this.getClass());
  register.registerNatives(methodMap);

  final int expected = 100;
  int actual = test(expected);
  Assertions.assertEquals(expected, actual);
}
```

# Play with JVMCI

JVMCI is not FFM, but ffmasm supports it!  
You can install your machine code into CodeCache on HotSpot as Tier 4 compiled code via JVMCI.

```java
  public static int getPid(){
    throw new UnsupportedOperationException("This method should be overriden by jvmci-adapter in ffmasm");
  }

  private static void installAMD64Code(Method method) throws Exception{
    new JVMCIAMD64AsmBuilder()
                    .emitPrologue()
/* mov %rax, $39 */ .movImm(com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64.Register.RAX, 39) // getpid
/* syscall       */ .syscall()
                    .emitEpilogue()
                    .install(method, 16);
  }

  private static void installAArch64Code(Method method) throws Exception{
    new JVMCIAArch64AsmBuilder()
                    .emitPrologue()
/* movz x8, $172 */ .movz(com.yasuenag.ffmasm.aarch64.Register.X8, 172, HWShift.None) // getpid
/* svc #0        */ .svc(0)
                    .emitEpilogue()
                    .install(method, 16);
  }
```

You need to use `JVMCIAMD64AsmBuilder` or its family (for SSE, AVX like `AMD64AsmBuilder`) for AMD64, `JVMCIAArch64AsmBuilder` for AArch64. Note that you have to call both `emitPrologue()` and `emitEpilogue()` before `install()`.

In above case, `install()` in each builder classes override `getPid()`, so you wouldn't see UnsupportedOperationException and you can get PID from it without any error.

These builder classes are provided by [jvmci-adapter](tools/jvmci-adapter). You can depend it on pom.xml as following:

```xml
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>com.yasuenag</groupId>
        <artifactId>jvmci-adapter</artifactId>
        <version>0.1.0</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

jvmci-adapter depends on ffmasm, and it is exposed transitively, so you do not need to add dependency to ffmasm.

# Play with perf tool

You can record both function name and entry point address as a perf map file.

## Record function

You can pass function name into `build()` method:

```java
.build("GeneratedFunc", Linker.Option.critical(true));
```

Function name would be set to `<unnamed>` if you do not pass function name (includes calling `build(Linker.Option)`).

## Write to map file

perf map file would be written at [shutdown hook](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Runtime.html#addShutdownHook(java.lang.Thread)) when `CodeSegment` lives. All of functions in all of `CodeSegment`s which are lives would be dumped at the time of shutdown hook.

You need to enable perf map dumper via `CodeSegment::enablePerfMapDumper`. Call `CodeSegment::disablePerfMapDumper` if you want to cancel the dumper.

## Generate jitdump

perf tool on Linux supports JIT-generated code. ffmasm can dump generated code as a jitdump. See an [example](examples/perf) for details.

### Record assembled code as a JIT'ed code

Pass [JitDump](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/JitDump.html) insntace to `build` method.

```java
jitdump = JitDump.getInstance(Path.of("."));

    :

.build("GeneratedFunc", jitdump);
```

Then you can run `perf record`. Note that you have to set monotonic clock with `-k` option.

```
perf record -k 1 $JAVA_HOME/bin/java ...
```

As a result, you would get `jit-<PID>.dump` which includes JIT information. You should keep until run `perf inject`.

### Inject JIT'ed code into recording file

`perf.data` generated by `perf record` would not include JIT'ed code, so you need to inject them via `perf inject` as following.

```
perf inject --jit -i perf.data -o perf.jit.data
```

You will get some `.so` file and `perf.jit.data` as an injected file as a result.

### Check with `perf report`

```
perf report -i perf.jit.data
```

# License

The GNU Lesser General Public License, version 3.0

Commit message:

Add tip for calling sequence for JVMCI

README.md, after:

ffmasm
===================

![CI result](../../actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)
![CodeQL](../../actions/workflows/codeql-analysis.yml/badge.svg)

ffmasm is an assembler for hand-assembling from Java.  
It uses Foreign Function & Memory API, so the application can call assembled code via [MethodHandle](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/invoke/MethodHandle.html).

* Javadoc: https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/
* Maven package: https://github.com/YaSuenag/ffmasm/packages/
* Supported instructions: See builder classes in [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/amd64/package-summary.html).

# Requirements

Java 22

# Supported platform

* Linux AMD64
* Windows AMD64
* Linux AArch64

# How to build

```
$ mvn package
```

## Test for ffmasm

```bash
$ mvn test
```

# How to use

See [Javadoc](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/) and [cpumodel](examples/cpumodel) examples.

## 1. Create `CodeSegment`

[CodeSegment](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/CodeSegment.html) is a storage for assembled code. In Linux, it would be allocated by `mmap(2)` with executable bit.  
It implements [AutoCloseable](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/AutoCloseable.html), so you can use try-with-resources in below:

```java
try(var seg = new CodeSegment()){
  ...
}
```

## 2. Create `MethodHandle`

You can assemble the code via inner classes of [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.AsmBuilder](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.html):

* [AsmBuilder.AMD64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AMD64.html)
* [AsmBuilder.SSE](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.SSE.html)
* [AsmBuilder.AVX](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AVX.html)
* [AsmBuilder.AArch64](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/AsmBuilder.AArch64.html)

### AMD64

You need to use [com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64.Register](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/amd64/Register.html) to specify registers in assembly code. Following example shows how you can create method `(I)I` (JNI signature) in ffmasm:

You can get `MethodHandle` in result of `build()`.

```java
var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT // 1st argument
           );

var method = new AsmBuilder.AMD64(seg, desc)
      /* push %rbp      */ .push(Register.RBP)
      /* mov %rsp, %rbp */ .movRM(Register.RSP, Register.RBP, OptionalInt.empty())
      /* mov %rdi, %rax */ .movRM(Register.RDI, Register.RAX, OptionalInt.empty())
      /* leave          */ .leave()
      /* ret            */ .ret()
                           .build(Linker.Option.critical(false));
```

> [!NOTE]
> [Linker.Option.critical()](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/Linker.Option.html#critical(boolean)) is recommended to pass `build()` method due to performance, but it might be cause of some issues in JVM (time to synchronize safepoint, memory corruption, etc). See Javadoc of `critical()`.

### AArch64

Most of code is same with AMD64, but it is the only one difference to use `AsmBuilder.AArch64` as builder instance.

```java
var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
             ValueLayout.JAVA_INT // 1st argument
           );

var method = new AsmBuilder.AArch64(codeSegment, desc)
/* stp x29, x30, [sp, #-16]! */ .stp(Register.X29, Register.X30, Register.SP, IndexClass.PreIndex, -16)
/* mov x29,  sp              */ .mov(Register.X29, Register.SP)
/* ldp x29, x30, [sp], #16   */ .ldp(Register.X29, Register.X30, Register.SP, IndexClass.PostIndex, 16)
/* ret                       */ .ret(Optional.empty())
                                .build();
```

## 3. Method call

```java
int ret = (int)method.invoke(100); // "ret" should be 100
```

# Debugging

[ffmasm-disassembler](tools/disas) can disassemble the code in [MemorySegment](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/foreign/MemorySegment.html) like generated by ffmasm, and dump assembly code to stdout.

You can download ffmasm-dissassembler Maven package from GitHub packages: https://github.com/YaSuenag/ffmasm/packages/2370043

See [examples/disas](examples/disas) for details.

## Requirements

ffmasm-disassembler requires [hsdis](https://github.com/openjdk/jdk/tree/master/src/utils/hsdis).

## Generate hsdis

To generate hsdis for Linux, you can use [hsdis-builder](https://github.com/YaSuenag/hsdis-builder).

## Deploy hsdis

It should be deployed one of following directory (it is documented as source comment in disassembler.cpp in HotSpot):

1. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/<vm>/libhsdis-<arch>.so`
2. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/<vm>/hsdis-<arch>.so`
3. `$JAVA_HOME/lib/hsdis-<arch>.so`
4. `hsdis-<arch>.so`  (using `LD_LIBRARY_PATH`)

If you don't want to deploy hsdis into your JDK, you can specify `hsdis` system property like `-Dhsdis=/path/to/hsdis-amd64.so`

## Examples

```
import com.yasuenag.ffmasmtools.disas.Disassembler;

    : <snip>

MemorySegment rdtsc = createRDTSC(); // Generate machine code with ffmasm
Disassembler.dumpToStdout(rdtsc); // Dump assembly code of `rdtsc` to stdout
```

# Play with JNI

You can bind native method to `MemorySegment` of ffmasm code dynamically.

You have to construct `MemorySegment` of the machine code with `AMD64AsmBuilder`, and you have to get it from `getMemorySegment()`. Then you can bind it via `NativeRegister`.

Following example shows native method `test` is binded to the code made by ffmasm. Note that 1st argument in Java is located at arg3 in native function because this is native function (1st arg is `JNIEnv*`, and 2nd arg is `jobject` or `jclass`).

```java
public native int test(int arg);

<snip>

try(var seg = new CodeSegment()){
  var desc = FunctionDescriptor.of(
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // return value
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // 1st arg (JNIEnv *)
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT, // 2nd arg (jobject)
               ValueLayout.JAVA_INT  // 3rd arg (arg1 of caller)
             );
  var stub = AsmBuilder.AMD64(seg, desc)
/* push %rbp         */ .push(Register.RBP)
/* mov %rsp, %rbp    */ .movRM(Register.RBP, Register.RSP, OptionalInt.empty())
/* mov %arg3, retReg */ .movMR(argReg.arg3(), argReg.returnReg(), OptionalInt.empty()) // arg1 in Java is arg3 in native
/* leave             */ .leave()
/* ret               */ .ret()
                        .getMemorySegment();

  var method = this.getClass()
                   .getMethod("test", int.class);

  var methodMap = Map.of(method, stub);
  var register = NativeRegister.create(this.getClass());
  register.registerNatives(methodMap);

  final int expected = 100;
  int actual = test(expected);
  Assertions.assertEquals(expected, actual);
}
```

# Play with JVMCI

JVMCI is not FFM, but ffmasm supports it!  
You can install your machine code into CodeCache on HotSpot as Tier 4 compiled code via JVMCI.

```java
  public static int getPid(){
    throw new UnsupportedOperationException("This method should be overriden by jvmci-adapter in ffmasm");
  }

  private static void installAMD64Code(Method method) throws Exception{
    new JVMCIAMD64AsmBuilder()
                    .emitPrologue()
/* mov %rax, $39 */ .movImm(com.yasuenag.ffmasm.amd64.Register.RAX, 39) // getpid
/* syscall       */ .syscall()
                    .emitEpilogue()
                    .install(method, 16);
  }

  private static void installAArch64Code(Method method) throws Exception{
    new JVMCIAArch64AsmBuilder()
                    .emitPrologue()
/* movz x8, $172 */ .movz(com.yasuenag.ffmasm.aarch64.Register.X8, 172, HWShift.None) // getpid
/* svc #0        */ .svc(0)
                    .emitEpilogue()
                    .install(method, 16);
  }
```

You need to use `JVMCIAMD64AsmBuilder` or its family (for SSE, AVX like `AMD64AsmBuilder`) for AMD64, `JVMCIAArch64AsmBuilder` for AArch64. Note that you have to call both `emitPrologue()` and `emitEpilogue()` before `install()`.

In above case, `install()` in each builder classes override `getPid()`, so you wouldn't see UnsupportedOperationException and you can get PID from it without any error.

> [!TIP]
> Register usage in C2 is different from platform ABI (e.g. AMD64 System V ABI). See [CallingSequences on OpenJDK Wiki](https://wiki.openjdk.org/display/HotSpot/CallingSequences) for details.

These builder classes are provided by [jvmci-adapter](tools/jvmci-adapter). You can depend it on pom.xml as following:

```xml
<dependencies>
    <dependency>
        <groupId>com.yasuenag</groupId>
        <artifactId>jvmci-adapter</artifactId>
        <version>0.1.0</version>
    </dependency>
</dependencies>
```

jvmci-adapter depends on ffmasm, and it is exposed transitively, so you do not need to add dependency to ffmasm.

# Play with perf tool

You can record both function name and entry point address as a perf map file.

## Record function

You can pass function name into `build()` method:

```java
.build("GeneratedFunc", Linker.Option.critical(true));
```

Function name would be set to `<unnamed>` if you do not pass function name (includes calling `build(Linker.Option)`).

## Write to map file

perf map file would be written at [shutdown hook](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/22/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Runtime.html#addShutdownHook(java.lang.Thread)) when `CodeSegment` lives. All of functions in all of `CodeSegment`s which are lives would be dumped at the time of shutdown hook.

You need to enable perf map dumper via `CodeSegment::enablePerfMapDumper`. Call `CodeSegment::disablePerfMapDumper` if you want to cancel the dumper.

## Generate jitdump

perf tool on Linux supports JIT-generated code. ffmasm can dump generated code as a jitdump. See an [example](examples/perf) for details.

### Record assembled code as a JIT'ed code

Pass [JitDump](https://yasuenag.github.io/ffmasm/com.yasuenag.ffmasm/com/yasuenag/ffmasm/JitDump.html) insntace to `build` method.

```java
jitdump = JitDump.getInstance(Path.of("."));

    :

.build("GeneratedFunc", jitdump);
```

Then you can run `perf record`. Note that you have to set monotonic clock with `-k` option.

```
perf record -k 1 $JAVA_HOME/bin/java ...
```

As a result, you would get `jit-<PID>.dump` which includes JIT information. You should keep until run `perf inject`.

### Inject JIT'ed code into recording file

`perf.data` generated by `perf record` would not include JIT'ed code, so you need to inject them via `perf inject` as following.

```
perf inject --jit -i perf.data -o perf.jit.data
```

You will get some `.so` file and `perf.jit.data` as an injected file as a result.

### Check with `perf report`

```
perf report -i perf.jit.data
```

# License

The GNU Lesser General Public License, version 3.0
